hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eatonson
welcome to heal NPD we're all familiar
with the stereotype of the vain
narcissist continually scanning their
body for imperfections a great example
might be Rob Lowe's character of Chris
trigger from the television show Parks
and Recreation
in one episode Low's character gets sick
with the flu and he's scandalized by the
loss of control that he experiences over
his body in one particularly funny scene
Lo talks to himself in the mirror and
commands his body to
stop
pooping
but all jokes aside is there Merit to
The Stereotype in this episode we'll
discuss illness anxiety and NPD
providing a psychodynamic description
that goes far beyond caricatures of
vanity for many individuals with
pathological narcissism fears about
health represent underlying Terror of
psychological disintegration
[Music]
individuals with pathological narcissism
and NPD often suffer from something
called illness anxiety it used to be
called hypochondriasis and it's a lot
more than simply checking your tongue in
the mirror illness anxiety is a
diagnosable disorder in the DSM and it's
anxiety about health that significantly
affects or disrupts a person's life and
relationships illness anxiety might
happen for a number of reasons but in
narcissism it tends to be caused by
deeply felt anxieties about loss of self
in a seminal paper titled fear of
breakdown psychoanalyst Donald winnicott
describes what he calls primitive
agonies these include difficult to
conceptualize experiences like returning
to an unintegrated State falling forever
loss of reality loss of the capacity to
relate to objects and loss of something
called psychosomatic collusion which is
the integration between mind and body
according to winacott these experiences
are difficult to imagine because our
psychologies have developed to defend
against imagining them they represent
unthought anxieties that dwell beneath
the defensive structure of Personality
they lie outside the reach of our
rational Minds
although difficult for our adult Minds
to comprehend these primitive agonies
are thought to occur regularly in
infancy and early childhood when we're
just putting together the pieces of a
self
so imagine building a tower of blocks
you know first You Begin by stacking one
block on top of the other and soon the
tower gets too tall and it falls down so
maybe you try again and this time you
try to be a little bit more careful to
better balance the blocks as you go but
inevitably the tower falls again
so on your third try maybe you create a
broader Base by using multiple blocks on
the first level and now the tower is
more stable and you can build taller but
still eventually it falls
I did this all day for a couple of years
eventually you'd have a very stable and
very tall tower so this is sort of like
how we build a sense of self
early experience can easily disrupt our
rickety block tower of self causing the
pieces to come crashing down a dirty
diaper the feeling of hunger fear of
Separation having a fever Etc babies and
young children completely fall apart
several times a day and if we try to
project ourselves into their subjective
experience we might imagine that this
repeated falling apart is actually
horrifying you completely lose control
of yourself your feelings your body
hopefully there's someone there to help
put you back together again with
patience care and empathic understanding
I think there's a reason why Humpty
Dumpty Rock-a-bye Baby and Jack and Jill
are popular nursery rhymes they all
involve themes of falling apart breaking
and then trying to put ourselves back
together again and on some level I think
we all know that these themes resonate
with early experience when we're
building a self we don't have the
conceptual tools or language to
understand what's happening it's part of
why we don't really remember those years
of Our Lives winnicott theorizes that
they're dominated by quote Unthinkable
experiences so-called because the mind
hasn't developed the ability to think
about them to represent them in a
meaningful way
they simply happen to us becoming an
indelible aspect of our self-structure
once built the self can't really think
the experience of not being a self it's
like asking an alive person to imagine
what it's like to be dead it's
impossible to imagine non-being
but the legacy of those years have
fallen apart again and again and again
remains in the form of anxiety
if good enough experience prevails in
our early years the anxieties that
remain from these so-called primitive
agonies tends to be minor
empathic care and support forms the sort
of glue that holds the self together
we're free to focus on other concerns
that don't necessarily involve
obsessional fears of annihilation but
what if good enough experience didn't
prevail
what if there were significant issues in
those early years what if caregivers
weren't mentally equipped to provide
care what if they were struggling with
their own mental illness or if there was
significant stress or disruption in the
household like Financial insecurity
domestic abuse substance abuse a lot of
yelling chaos or illness what happens
when the already stressful process of
building a self is impacted by repeated
trauma well try to imagine building a
block tower on a table that someone
keeps shaking
imagine how frustrating that would be
imagine how hard it would be to figure
out what configurations worked better
than others when someone kept coming by
and shaking the table
developing a self in a poor early care
environment is like building a block
tower on a shaky table
not only are the breakdowns more
frequent but the anxiety about falling
apart becomes a central aspect of the
self-structure that eventually emerges
from that process for individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD someone
kept sort of shaking the table when they
were attempting to build a self
the fear of falling apart becomes a
central aspect of their self-experience
part of this is due to wennocott's
primitive agonies and the fear of loss
of self
kind of anxiety is called paranoid
anxiety because it focuses on fears of
annihilation
and from a developmental perspective
paranoid anxiety is very young it comes
from a part of the self that's not at
all sure of its existence a part that's
terrified of losing control falling
apart Coming Undone and falling forever
into non-being
narcissists rely on the false self to
cover these anxieties the false self is
developed to compensate for underlying
vulnerabilities in the personality now
if the false self fails to adequately
compensate for the underlying wounds and
anxiety Then a collapse occurs and the
narcissist is exposed to the deficits in
their self-structure and we call this a
vulnerable phase of the disorder
the narcissistic individual develops a
kind of secondary anxiety and this
anxiety typically functions in kind of a
disguised way as a concrete metaphor or
something that psychoanalyst Hannah
Siegel called a symbolic equation
the mind doesn't distinguish between the
object and its mental representation of
the object in this case anxiety about
the self falling apart is represented by
anxiety about the body falling apart and
the two become indistinguishable
now as I've stated these anxieties
develop before the Mind had the ability
to represent them with language or to
symbolize them to itself with thoughts
or context they simply are they exist in
an unrepresented uncimbilized form as
primitive agonies that surface disguised
as fear of breakdown in his paper on
this topic winacott notes that such
fears seem like they're about the future
the narcissistic individual with illness
anxiety scans their body for signs of
impending illness signs that a breakdown
is going to occur sometime in the future
but the actual breakdown that's feared
has already occurred it lives in the
past and it was already survived so if
you identify as someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD and you
experience this sort of illness anxiety
know that what you're really afraid of
has already happened these fears are
relics of the past not harbingers of the
future
they exist now as well-laid Pathways in
your deep mind that surface in a
disguised form concrete metaphors for
loss of self you may not be able to
change these anxieties they may be
encoded too deeply
but you can reframe these fears as
signposts pointing to the Past someplace
you've already been rather than warnings
about the future
these fears tell a story of survival Not
Tragedy
they're evidence that you lived
in a previous episode I discussed
resiliency your illness anxiety may feel
like a weakness it may make you feel
like you can't trust your body that it's
not a safe place
but I wonder what it would be like to
reframe these fears
to see them as trophies rather than
liabilities
how would it change your feelings about
yourself and your body to understand
that your anxieties are echoes of a
catastrophe that you already survived
see how that makes you feel to reflect
on your resiliency in this way
okay so that's it for today please like
subscribe and share if you found this
helpful and be sure to leave questions
comments and suggestions for future
episodes and until next time take good
care
stop
pooping
[Music]